CONTENTS
==========
I.	INTRO
II.	IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
III.	INSTALLATION
IV.	CONFIGURATION
V.	LDAP CONFIGURATION
VI.	SSHD CONFIGURATION FOR 2 FACTOR AUTHENTICATION
VII.	THE mobileCarrier OBJECT CLASS
VIII.	ADDITIONAL NOTES
IX.	CAVEATS


I. INTRO
--------
pam_otpw is a PAM module written to create and send a one-time
password for user authentication.  It was written specifically to work
together with the OpenSSH server daemon, sshd(8), to provide 2-factor
authentication for host logins. 

The module can also be used with other tools that use PAM for
authentication, though it has only been tested with sshd(8). 

pam_otpw is compiled as a shared library, pam_otpw.so, that can be
placed into the PAM authentication stack where it will be called as
part of a program's authentication mechanism. 

pam_otpw sends an SMS text message containing a one-time password to
the user's mobile device using their mobile carrier's SMS Gateway
domain and the SMTP protocol.

Users' SMS Gateway addresses must be stored in their LDAP entries in
an LDAP directory.  This repo includes a file that defines an LDAP
object class which may be used for this purpose.


II. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
---------------------------
Passwords consist of a 6-digit string, derived from a randomly
generated number; The value will never be reused - it will be valid
only once for the lifetime of the user on that host.

6 digits constrains the range of possible values to be between 0 to
999999.  If the number generated has fewer than 6-digits, then leading
zeros will be prepended to the value until it becomes a string of 6
numbers (e.g., the number `75' becomes the string `000075').

Since each value can never be used more than once, the module must
maintain a record of values previously sent to the user.

For each user attempting to authenticate the module creates a file
with a length of 125000 bytes under /var/lib/pam_otpw/.  This file is
used as a bit-map, where the offset of each bit records numbers
previously used.  For example, if the bit at offset `n' is set, then
the number `n' has already been used; if not set, then the number
hasn't be used. 

The module will iterate, regenerating random numbers, until it has one
that maps to bit that isn't set.  When found, the bit at that offset
will be set, and the number sent to the user. 

When the authentication function in pam_otpw.so is called, it reads
the /etc/pam_ldap.conf config file, using those values to query the
LDAP directory for the `smsGateway' attribute in the user's directory
entry.  It then sends the password value to the SMS Gateway and
prompts the user to input value. 

The user is allowed 3 attempts to input the correct value.

When used in conjunction with SSH, the sshd(8) daemon controls the
timeout for both input operations (password and 6-digit string).  It
also controls the max number of attempts to input credentials before
terminating the connection. 


III. INSTALLATION
------------------
1.   The pam_otpw module requires libldap and related libraries from the
     OpenLDAP project (http://www.openldap.org).  Your system most likely
     has a package that installs these libraries.

2.   To compile the pam_otpw module, gcc and GNU make are required.  Also,
     the following header files must be present on your system:

	ldap.h
	pam_appl.h
	pam_modules.h
	pam_ext.h

     On Linux systems, these are usually contained in a developer package for 
     pam and ldap.

3.   cd to the src/ directory and run:

	make mod

     and as a privileged user 

        make install

     (on BSDs, use gmake);     

     If all goes well, the shared library pam_otpw.so will be installed in /etc/pam.d/

4.   The pam_otpw modules expects 



IV. CONFIGURATION
------------------
The pam configuration file(s) must be modified to use the pam_otpw.so
library.  The module should use the 'auth' type management group.  See
pam.conf(5).

The repo includes the PAM config file `sshd' which has been used
successfully on a Centos 7.1 system for SSH authentication.


V. LDAP CONFIGURATION
----------------------
The pam_otpw module searches the LDAP directory for a DN with the uid
attribute that matches the username being queried.  This typically
requires LDAP entries to use either the posixAccount or inetOrgPerson
object class. 

The user's SMS Gateway is expected to be a value assigned to the
smsGateway attribute in a user's LDAP entry.  The file
mobileCarrier.schema defines the mobileCarrierData object class with
the smsGateway attribute. 

To use the mobileCarrier object class with OpenLDAP's slapd server,
copy the file mobileCarrierData.schema to OpenLDAP's schema directory
and configure slapd to include the new object class (see
slapd.conf(5)). 

See the next section for more information on the mobileCarrer object
class.


VI. SSHD CONFIGURATION FOR 2-FACTOR AUTHENTICATION
----------------------------------------------------
For ssh set the keys `ChallengeResponseAuthentication' to `yes' (the
default). See sshd_config(5).


VII. The mobileCarrier Object Class
-------------------------------------
The mobileCarrier object class provided with getpk tools defines 4 attributes:

smsGateway		The SMS Gateway: an email address consisting of the user's
			mobile number and their mobile carrier's SMS Gate Domain.
			E.g., 1234567890@txt.att.net
msisdn			The user's mobile phone number. Conforms to rfc4517, Section 3.3.31
mobileCarrier		The mobile carrier (e.g., at&t, tmobile, etc)
smsGateDomain		Email domain for mobile carriers SMS gateway 
			(e.g., txt.att.net, vtext.com)


VIII. CAVEATS
-------------

1. The NIST is no longer recommends using SMS for 2 factor
authentication:

"Out-of-band authentication using the PSTN (SMS or voice) is
discouraged and is being considered for removal in future editions of
this guideline."

See https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html, Section 5

2.  The format of the SMS text message is largely beyond control of
the PAM module.  Different carriers will format the messages
differently.

3. SMS messages sent via SMTP may not be received immediately.  Delays
can occur.  This can be a problem if applications expect confirmation
of authentication within a time interval less than the time required
to deliver the SMS message. 



